---
layout: splash
title: "Mandiakui : Digital Sovereignty"
---
Mandiakui Microgrids are digitally sovereign in that
they are cryptographically isolated from the rest of the internet.  In
fact, they are able to deliver services without any other system.

# Noun: Digital Sovereignty

The 5G network bubble generated by the self-powering microgrid is
cryptographically isolated from other digital systems.  Access is
regulated by the [Microgrid operator](/microgridOperator), which
manages the [Mobile Device Management System](/mdm).

The [Microgrid operator](/microgridOperator) also manages bridge
systems which communicate with both national and supranational systems
such as the host nation's e-Government offerings, a border partner's
e-Government offerings, or a rapid deployment disaster response or
humanitarian crisis system.

The e-Estonian X-Road platform is used for global-best-practice
interparty data-exchange and the
[cryptographic anchor](/glossary#cryptographic-anchor) in
the [Microgrid operator](/microgridOperator).  This cryptographic
requirement is the source of digital sovereignty - however, as it is
digital sovereignty, normal concepts of control-over-territory do
not apply. 

We recommend that this operator be a formal business owned by the community
and potentially spanning multiple national jurisdictions.



# Sovereignty Enables Disaster Preparation

However, they come
equipped with adapters capable of connecting to a complete range of
local communities, national systems, international organizations, and
other global entities
preconfigured
to interact with a selectable range of national, international, and
global entities using the e-Estonian X-Road protocol.

This means that each microgrid deployment is ready
for integration with all other national microgrids as well as with
international organizations, or, in the case of border microgrids, with adjacent states.  Preconfiguration for integration with crises response
systems increases the resiliency of the communities to absorb the shocks
from nearby political or climate disasters.

# Microgrid Sovereignty Strengthens National Sovereignty

Microgrids which support the 